Improve the contributing guide (#207)
DazzlingFugu/ember-fr-guides-source: CONTRIBUTING.md

- If you find the issue and it's free, assign yourself to it or leave a comment to notify people you're going to start the translation.
- If the file you wish to translate is missing from the issues list (which can happen), open a new issue using the template "File to translate".
- Translate the page entirely and submit it for review before starting another page.

### 2. Clone the repository / Keep your fork updated

If it's your first contribution, fork this repository from GitHub interface. Then on your machine:
```
git clone <your fork's url>
git remote add upstream https://github.com/dazzlingfugu/ember-fr-guides-source.git
```

As you tackle new issues, you'll want to be sure that you always start by working on the most recent code. The second command is to set an upstream. By pulling from it, you can sync up your fork's `master` with a parent repository's `master`. For this to work, you should make sure you're always committing to a branch, not `master`.

Each time you want to start a new page:
```
git checkout master
git pull upstream master

> git checkout -b some-branch-name

Author: Nice, I wasn't aware of that

```

### 3. Translate and lint the page

Each PR should have:
- 1 commit
- 2~3 files changed (`[some-page].md`, `.remarkignore`, optionally `.local.dic`)

> While you are working, keep your commit stack clean with one commit, for instance: `git commit -m "feat: translate guides/release/index.md`.

Reviewer: `feat` does not make sense with changes only focused on documentation.

```suggestion
While you are working, keep your commit stack clean with one commit, for instance: `git commit -m "docs: translate guides/release/index.md`.
```

Author: To me, docs refer to the documentation of the app or the addon we're implementing. Here, translating Ember Guides pages is more like our main feature IMO.

Reviewer: Hmm I tend to disagree.

Working on Ember Guides, a feature would be like a new search input, a dropdown, a sidebar etc.

If people are simply updating Ember.js documentation files, whether it is for this repository or not, whether it is translations or not, it is a documentation change.

Reviewer: 1. Additionally, we should tell people to link their single-commit to the corresponding issue.
2. In the commit's subject, no need to tell which file is translate, since the commit already applies to a file, that's what we will see in the history and it does not make sense to write the file path in there again.

````text
While you are working, keep your commit stack clean with one commit only, and link it to the corresponding issue you are working on.

For instance, let's say we have finished to work on the issue #66 and we are ready to commit our changes:

```
git commit --all
```

Then, for the content of our commit let's write:

```
docs: translate to French

Resolves #66
```

The last line (after 2 line breaks) links your commit with the issue it resolves.
````

Author: Honestly, my intention was not to be so strict about the commit message, my point was just to have 1 single clear commit. What information is the most relevant is mainly a question of taste and personal way to work IMO. I'll rephrase that a bit to make it sound like advice.

Once you have translated the `.md` page of your choice, you need to run the linter to make sure there's no typo:
- Add the path to your page in `.remarkignore` (respect the alphabetical order for readability)
- Run `npm run lint`

> If there are errors because "a word is written twice", but it's expected in French (Je vais vous "faire faire" une jolie traduction), make sure to fix all the other errors of the same paragraph before adding `<!-- spell ignore -->` above the paragraph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are errors such as "a word is written twice" but it's expected in French (“Je vais vous "faire faire" une jolie traduction”), make sure to fix all the other errors of the same paragraph before adding `<!-- spell ignore -->` above the paragraph.
```

> If there are errors because you kept an English term commonly used in French, add this word the the `.local.dic` file (respect the alphabetical order for readability, lowercase words are below uppercase acronyms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are errors because you kept an English term commonly used in French, add this word to the `.local.dic` file (respect the alphabetical order for readability, lowercase words are below uppercase acronyms).
```

### 4. Label your PR

Once you're at the point that you'd like feedback: 
- Submit a Pull Request
- Add the label "**Guides FR trad**" on it

## What syntax rules should I follow?

> ### 1. Don't translate the code / translate the UI data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Don't translate the code but translate the UI data
```

Author: I used slash as a visual opposition, I feel like using a full sentence with only words make both sides less visible

Reviewer: In English, the word `but` is used to connect ideas that contrast, it expresses ideas in opposition.
The reader will grasp that opposition by reading "this way, BUT that way".

We can also simply be straightforward and just say

```
Don't translate the code, translate the UI data
```

Reviewer: Besides, I forgot to add, but the very first time I read that title, I instinctively read it this way, hence my suggestions for all these titles:

```text
Don't translate the code / translate the UI data
      ˆˆˆˆ|ˆˆˆˆ            ˆˆˆˆ|ˆˆˆˆ
           ¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯¯

Don't translate the code
      translate the UI data
```

Some people unfamiliar with the process may read this as a "or".
Of course, immediately after I knew this meaning was wrong but because I am part of this repository.

To me, using a slash `/` does not ensure everyone will understand the same thing, the real meaning, words do.

---

Another nice and simple alternative:

```
Translate the UI data, not the code
.
Translate the UI data, but not the code
```

This better ensures readers will first see what they need to do.

```
Translate articles description, not their titles
.
Translate articles description, but not their titles
```

> Don't translate variable names in code blocks. Most French-speaker devs have their code base in English, the purpose of this translation is to explain Ember concepts in a more accessible language. In the code blocks, translate the UI-related elements, what a French user would see on the page or would hear when using a screen reader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't translate variable names in code blocks. Most French-speaker devs have their codebase in English, the purpose of these translations is to explain Ember concepts in a more accessible language. In the code blocks, translate the UI-related elements, what a French user would see on the page or would hear when using a screen reader.
```

```diff
  <button type="button" class="image large" {{on "click" this.toggleSize}}>
-    <img ...attributes alt="Picture of the rental">
-    <small>View smaller</small>
+    <img ...attributes alt="Photo de la propriété">
+    <small>Réduire</small>
  </button>
  ```

> ### 2. Use _italics_ for English terms / explain English terms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2. Use _italics_ for English terms and explain English terms
```

Author: ```suggestion
### 2. Use _italics_ for English terms, explain English terms
```

> Some technical terms can be intuitively translated into French. For instance, we will translate "tag" to "balise" or "generator" to "générateur" and that won't be chocking for the reader. We should translate as soon as it's intuitive enough. 

Reviewer: We can choke our readers, that should not shock them.

```suggestion
Some technical terms can be intuitively translated into French. For instance, we will translate "tag" to "balise" or "generator" to "générateur, this won't be shocking to the reader. We should translate as soon as it's intuitive enough. 
```

> On the other hand, some terms are not intuitive at all to translate and we generally use the English one. For instance, we wouldn't naturally say "assistant" for "helper" or "fabrique" for "factory".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, some terms are not intuitive to translate and we generally keep the English one. For instance, we wouldn't naturally say "assistant" for "helper" or "fabrique" for "factory".
```

In any case, when you encounter a technical term:
- Put the English in _italic_ style and keep the regular style for French.
- The first time the word appears on the page, use the language you'll reuse along the page and add the language you _won't_ use in parenthesis so the reader can do the link between English and French.

In this example, we will stick to "espace de nom" in the rest of the page:
```diff
- Components like these are known as namespaced components. Namespacing allows us to organize our components by folders according to their purpose.
+ Les composants comme ceux-ci sont appelés composants à espace de nom (_namespaced components_). Les espaces de nom permettent d'organiser les composants par dossiers selon leur fonction.
```

In this example, we will go for "store" and "record" in the rest of the page:
```diff
- The EmberData store provides an interface for retrieving records of a single type. Use `store.findRecord()` to retrieve a record.

> + Le _store_ (magasin, réserve) d'EmberData fournit une interface pour retrouver les _records_ (enregistrements) d'un seul type. Utilisez `store.findRecord()` pour récupérer un _record_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Le _store_ (magasin, réserve) d'EmberData fournit une interface pour récupérer les _records_ (enregistrements) d'un type donné. Utilisez `store.findRecord()` pour récupérer un _record_.
```

```

> If the literal translation of a term is _reeeeally_ convoluted, don't hesitate to be wordy about it. The purpose is to make this understandable to non-English speakers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the literal translation of a term is _reeeeally_ convoluted, don't hesitate to be wordy about it. The purpose is to make it understandable to non-English speakers:
```

```diff
- This method is also known as the _model hook_.
+ Cette méthode est aussi appelée le _model hook_ (_hook_ signifie littéralement "un crochet" mais se traduit mal dans un contexte technique. On peut voir le _hook_ comme une fonction mise à disposition et exécutée en interne par le framework, et dont on définit le contenu, on y "accroche" du code).
```

> ### 3. Don't translate articles titles / translate descriptions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Don't translate articles titles but translate descriptions
```

Some pages of the Guides reference articles, introduced with a title and sometimes a description. If this resource is also available in French (for instance, a lot of pages from MDN website are translated), then use the French URL in the translation (be careful with that MDN example though, because some pages are not translated entirely and it can be better to keep the English).

> If the resource is not translated or if the translation is incomplete, keep the English link and translate only the description, not the title of the resource itself, because we need to make clear to the reader that it's an English document:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the resource is not translated or if the translation is incomplete, keep the English link and translate only the description, not the title of the resource itself, because we need to make clear to the reader it's an English document:
```

```diff
- [Using ARIA:](https://www.w3.org/TR/using-aria/) a practical guide for developers on how to add accessibility information to HTML element
+ <!-- spell ignore -->
+ [Using ARIA](https://www.w3.org/TR/using-aria/) : un guide pratique pour ajouter aux éléments HTML des informations accessibles.
```

### 4. Set non-breakable spaces

> `&nbsp;` is the HTML sign for "non-breakable space" and can be used in markdown as well. If the space is not set non-breakable, then a punctuation sign like ":" or ";" could be separated from the previous word and moved to the next line, which is incorrect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`&nbsp;` is the HTML sign for "non-breakable space" and can be used in markdown as well. If the space is not set non-breakable, then a punctuation mark like ":" or ";" could be separated from the previous word and moved to the next line, which is incorrect.
```

```diff
- Using ARIA: a practical guide (...)
+ Using ARIA&nbsp;: un guide pratique (...)

> ```

Reviewer: I am still **really doubtful** about this whole section (I know I already commented about that, somewhere).
Besides you use the conditional "could be separated" so it is clear "this can sometimes happen, sometimes not".

I have never seen such an overuse of `&nbsp;` in Markdown files, even when their content is in French.

Markdown is not that weird, if there is one single space it is and will be respected.
However, 2 spaces at the end of a line _can_ create a line-break, that depends on the tool rendering the Markdown file. This is known as hard-break and soft-breaks:
- https://spec.commonmark.org/0.30/#hard-line-breaks
- https://spec.commonmark.org/0.30/#soft-line-breaks

We, as reviewers, can detect these by enabling the "Show whitespace changes". But I am confident we should not encounter many situations where people put 2 spaces or not between a word and a ponctuation sign.

One quick example:
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vuejs-translations/docs-fr/8851ab5351b4015d8c3b5404fa17d3e3da23a77b/src/guide/scaling-up/sfc.md

Author: I have always marked my non-breakable spaces, no matter the content format 🤷‍♀️ 

I don't see how the line-breaking samples are related to that, to be honest. To me, the main reason why people don't write non-breakable spaces is because they are lazy or ignorant about the fact punctuation marks can't be moved to the next line in French.

After our first discussion about this, I tested the app without `&nbsp;` and I am totally able to make the render incorrect on some screen sizes, so I don't see why we shouldn't put them, it's not a big deal, it can even be done with a search & replace.

## What tone should I use?

### 1. General tone

To stick to the official Guides tone, try to find the right balance to be "relax" without being too familiar:
- Prefer "ça" over "cela"
- Use "nous" when you mean "you & the reader", let's do this together (this is used a lot in the tutorial): "À présent, faisons ça"
- Use "on" as the undefined pronoun, when you talk about a general rule: "En général, on écrit les variable en anglais"

### 2. Inclusive writing

> We generally avoid the "·" character in the translation because all screen readers don't handle it very well. However, there are other ways to be inclusive in your writing. Be aware of all masculine endings and don't hesitate to rephrase the sentence in order to use a more neutral tone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We avoid the "·" character in the translation because all screen readers don't handle it very well. However, there are other ways to be inclusive in your writing. Be aware of all masculine endings and don't hesitate to rephrase the sentence in order to use a more neutral tone.
```

```diff
If (...), the developer would need to write the following additional code

- Si (...), alors le développeur aurait dû écrire le code suivant
+ Si (...), alors nous aurions dû écrire le code suivant
```

If you don't see how to make the sentence neutral and it's only one spot on the page, prefer the "·" character over the masculine term.

### 3. Can I use Google Translate to go faster?

You are free to use the method and tools you like to translate the file, what matters is the result. 

> Tools like [Google Translate](https://translate.google.fr/?hl=fr&sl=en&tl=fr&op=translate) can set up an approximative translation for you, then you can fix the mistakes with your own words. But keep in mind you could have _a lot_ of things to fix because it produces very literal translations. Most of the time translating yourself directly is just faster (believe me I tried).

Reviewer: We should "recommend" DeepL instead, which offers more option and more accurate translations. Google Translate is just pure garbage, even if it's just to get an approximative translation to start with.

https://www.deepl.com

Author: ```suggestion
Tools like [DeepL](https://www.deepl.com) can set up an approximative translation for you, then you can fix the mistakes with your own words. But keep in mind you could have _a lot_ of things to fix because it produces very literal translations. Most of the time translating yourself directly is just faster (believe me I tried).
```

> Tools like [Google Translate](https://translate.google.fr/?hl=fr&sl=en&tl=fr&op=translate) can set up an approximative translation for you, then you can fix the mistakes with your own words. But keep in mind you could have _a lot_ of things to fix because it produces very literal translations. Most of the time translating yourself directly is just faster (believe me I tried).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tools like [Google Translate](https://translate.google.fr/?hl=fr&sl=en&tl=fr&op=translate) can set up an approximative translation for you, then you can fix the mistakes with your own words. But keep in mind you could have _a lot_ of things to fix because it produces very literal translations. Most of the time translating yourself directly is just faster.
```

This contributing guide will focus on the translation.

## I want to translate a page of the guide!

Please note that no attempt is made to translate content for older versions of the Guides. We focus only on the latest release.

### 1. Assign yourself a page

- Find a page you want to translate in the list of [issues](https://github.com/DazzlingFugu/ember-fr-guides-source/issues) to make sure no one is already working on it.
- If you find the issue and it's free, assign yourself to it or leave a comment to notify people you're going to start the translation.
- If the file you wish to translate is missing from the issues list (which can happen), open a new issue using the template "File to translate".
- Translate the page entirely and submit it for review before starting another page.

### 2. Clone the repository / Keep your fork updated

If it's your first contribution, fork this repository from GitHub interface, then on your machine:
```
git clone <your fork's url>

> git remote add upstream https://github.com/dazzlingfugu/ember-fr-guides-source.git

Author: Typo 🤔

Author: ```suggestion
git remote add upstream https://github.com/ember-learn/guides-source.git
```

```

### 3. Translate and lint the page

Each PR should have:
- 1 commit
- 2~3 files changed (`[some-page].md`, `.remarkignore`, optionally `.local.dic`)

While you are working, keep your commit stack clean with one commit, for instance: `git commit -m "feat: translate guides/release/index.md`.

Once you have translated the `.md` page of your choice, you need to run the linter to make sure there's no typo:
- Add the path to your page in `.remarkignore` (respect the alphabetical order for readability)
- Run `npm run lint`

If there are errors such as "a word is written twice" but it's expected in French (“Je vais vous "faire faire" une jolie traduction”), make sure to fix all the other errors of the same paragraph before adding `<!-- spell ignore -->` above the paragraph.

If there are errors because you kept an English term commonly used in French, add this word to the `.local.dic` file (respect the alphabetical order for readability, lowercase words are below uppercase acronyms).

### 4. Label your PR

Once you're at the point that you'd like feedback: 
- Submit a Pull Request
- Add the label "**Guides FR trad**" on it

## What syntax rules should I follow?

> ### 1. Don't translate the code / translate the UI data

Author: ```suggestion
### 1. Don't translate the code, but translate the UI data
```

+ Les composants comme ceux-ci sont appelés composants à espace de nom (_namespaced components_). Les espaces de nom permettent d'organiser les composants par dossiers selon leur fonction.
```

In this example, we will go for "store" and "record" in the rest of the page:
```diff
- The EmberData store provides an interface for retrieving records of a single type. Use `store.findRecord()` to retrieve a record.
+ Le _store_ (magasin, réserve) d'EmberData fournit une interface pour récupérer les _records_ (enregistrements) d'un type donné. Utilisez `store.findRecord()` pour récupérer un _record_.
```

If the literal translation of a term is _reeeeally_ convoluted, don't hesitate to be wordy about it. The purpose is to make it understandable to non-English speakers:

```diff
- This method is also known as the _model hook_.
+ Cette méthode est aussi appelée le _model hook_ (_hook_ signifie littéralement "un crochet" mais se traduit mal dans un contexte technique. On peut voir le _hook_ comme une fonction mise à disposition et exécutée en interne par le framework, et dont on définit le contenu, on y "accroche" du code).
```

> ### 3. Don't translate articles titles / translate descriptions

Author: ```suggestion
### 3. Translate article descriptions, but not their titles
```
